# CS465 Portfolio

# Architecture
## Compare and contrast the types of frontend development you used in your full stack project, including Express HTML, JavaScript, and the single-page application (SPA).
For this project we worked on two different instances of a frontend for our web application. The first was our client facing page, made using Express for the static HTML on the website. JavaScript was utilized to retrieve data from the backend, utilizing handlebars as a template to fill the data in. Our other instance focused on creating a single-age application. Where the Express site has to utilize Express to load HTML and communicate via controllers with JavaScript for loading every page, the SPA only has to load it once. We used the SPA to create an admin-only page, allowing the staff at Travlr to easily change entries for the trip listings via the different CRUD methods implemented. With Angular, the initial load takes a little longer than the express pages, but once it's loaded, it creates an incredibly dynamic site that is perfect for the staff to interact with.

## Why did the backend use a NoSQL MongoDB database?
Using a NoSQL MongoDB database comes with a few advantages. Not only is it easy to scale upwards, NoSQL aren't beholden to strict structure, making it a very flexible to use. In our case, we could store it in a way that closely aligned with JSON, making it easy to query and utilize in our project.

# Functionality
## How is JSON different from Javascript and how does JSON tie together the frontend and backend development pieces?
While JavaScript is a programming language we utilized for our web application, JSON, or JavaScript Object Notation, is a just a format to store data within the site. JSON is easily understood through JavaScript, allowing us to quickly read the data from our backend and utilize it through API calls to either make adjustments through the admin-only page, or display to the user.
## Provide instances in the full stack process when you refactored code to improve functionality and efficiencies, and name the benefits that come from reusable user interface (UI) components.
Early on while developing the customer facing Express site we were rendering the entire page in static HTML. While for just three trips it was not a difficult task, as more trips were added it would be innefficient, so we refactored the code to function as a template using Handlebars to fill in the site with JSON data stored for each trip in the database. This not only brought the page down to around 30 lines of code, but it made it so as we added more trips to the backend, they would automatically be added alongside the others. Later on, once API endpoints were implemented, we needed to further refactor the site to utilize these endpoints rather than simple reading from a static JSON file. Another instance of refactoring came when we were working on the SPA. Our rendering of the trip listing could only be displayed as cards and adding other options would add extra complexity. By instead seperating the rendering logic into its own component, we could implement the principle of seperation of concerns, making everything easier to manage.


# Testing
## Methods for request and retrieval necessitate various types of API testing of endpoints, in addition to the difficulties of testing with added layers of security. Explain your understanding of methods, endpoints, and security in a full stack application.
An important component of this project was the use of HTTP methods for interactions between our application and the user. Postman was an invaluable tool for getting our API endpoints, utilizing GET, POST, and PUT methods to ensure we can interact with the backend, and making incorrect calls to test the error handling of our program. We further had to test that the specific API routes to our endpoints, such as the /trips endpoint functioned. With backend testing through Postman done, we also needed to ensure the SPA could be used by admins for the Travlr staff to modify the data via the add trip or edit trip buttons. Lastly, to ensure only the staff at Travlr can make changes to our database, we implemented a layer of security via authentication. In order for the calls to be made, one has to first log in and receive a JSON Web Token which will be utilized alongside the calls to ensure the user is permitted, adding another layer of testing to check that calls made without a token simply alert that the user is not authorized.

# Reflection
## How has this course helped you in reaching your professional goals? What skills have you learned, developed, or mastered in this course to help you become a more marketable candidate in your career field?
Throughout this course we've learned many valuable skills. By working through a full stack development process, we got experience designing an application keeping connections between the front and back end of the application in mind. Further practice setting up a database to store our data is always helpful, especially now with the added practice towards implementing routing and endpoints throughout the project. One of the most important skills I got practice with throughout this project was with Git which helps make version control and project management incredibly convenient. All the skills I've honed throughout this course are pretty common requirements for jobs in the field, and once I get a little more time to polish the project, it will hopefully be a nice piece to show in a portfolio.
